--- Page 1 ---
Visual C# How to Program, 6/e
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 2 ---
Exception Handling: Processing the Incorrect Response
An exception indicates a problem that occurs while a 
program executes. 
Exception handling enables you to create fault-tolerant 
programs that can resolve (or handle) exceptions. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 3 ---
In many cases, this allows a program to continue executing 
as if no problems were encountered. 
More severe problems might prevent a program from 
continuing normal execution, instead requiring the program 
to notify the user of the problem, then terminate. 
When the runtime or a method detects a problem, such as 
an invalid array index or an invalid method argument, it 
throws an exception—that is, an exception occurs.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 4 ---
To handle an exception, place any code that might throw an 
exception in a try statement. 
The try block contains the code that might throw an 
exception, and the catch block contains the code that 
handles the exception if one occurs. 
At this point the try block terminates and the catch block 
begins executing—if you declared any variables in the try
block, they no longer exist, so they’re not accessible in the 
catch block. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 5 ---
The catch block declares a type and an exception 
parameter (ex). 
The catch block can handle exceptions of the specified 
type.
Inside the catch block, you can use the parameter’s 
identifier to interact with a caught exception object.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 6 ---
Class Time1 represents the time of day.
The class contains public properties for the Hour, Minute and 
Second.
A class’s public members are the public services or the public
interface that this class provides to its clients.
Time1 does not declare a constructor, so the compiler defines a default 
constructor. 
Each property receives the default value 0 for an int. 
Instance variables and auto-implemented properties also can be 
assigned values in their declarations
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 7 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 8 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 9 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 10 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 11 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 12 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 13 ---
The access modifiers public and private control access to a class’s 
variables, methods and properties.
The primary purpose of public methods/properties is to present to 
the class’s clients a view of the services the class provides.
Clients of the class need not be concerned with how the class accomplishes its 
tasks.
A class’s private variables, properties and methods are not directly 
accessible to the class’s clients. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 14 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 15 ---
Every object can access a reference to itself with keyword this.
When a non-static method/property is called, its body implicitly uses 
keyword this to refer to the object’s instance variables and other non-
static class members.
You can also use keyword this explicitly in a non-static method’s 
body. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 16 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 17 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 18 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 19 ---
If the constructor’s parameter names are identical to the class’s 
instance-variable names, so they hide (shadow) the corresponding 
instance variables.
You can use the this reference to refer to hidden instance variables 
explicitly.
If a member is not hidden, the this keyword is implied, but can be 
included explicitly.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 20 ---
Overloaded constructors enable objects of a class to be conveniently 
initialized in different ways.
To overload constructors, simply provide multiple constructor 
declarations with different signatures.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 21 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 22 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 23 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 24 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 25 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 26 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 27 ---
Class Time2Test (Fig. 10.6) creates six Time2 objects to invoke the 
overloaded Time2 constructors. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 28 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 29 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 30 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 31 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 32 ---
• Every class must have at least one constructor. 
• If you do not provide any constructors in a class’s declaration, the 
compiler creates a default constructor that takes no arguments when 
it is invoked.
• The compiler will not create a default constructor for a class that 
explicitly declares at least one constructor.
• If you have declared a constructor, but want to be able to invoke the 
constructor with no arguments, you must declare a parameterless
constructor. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 33 ---
A class can have objects of values types or references to objects of 
other classes as members. 
This is called composition and is sometimes referred to as a has-a
relationship. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 34 ---
Class Date
Class Date declares instance variables month and day, and auto-implemented property Year to 
represent a date. 
Class Employee
Class Employee has public auto-implemented, getter-only properties 
FirstName, LastName, BirthDate and HireDate
Demonstrates that a class can have references to objects of other classes as 
members
Class EmployeeTest
Class EmployeeTest creates two Date objects to represent an Employee’s 
birthday and hire date, respectively. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 35 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 36 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 37 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 38 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 39 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 40 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 41 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 42 ---
• Every object you create uses various system resources, such as 
memory.
• In many programming languages, these system resources are 
reserved for the object’s use until they’re explicitly released by the 
programmer.
• If all the references to the object that manages the resource are lost 
before the resource is explicitly released, it can no longer be 
released. This is known as a resource leak.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 43 ---
• The Common Language Runtime (CLR) uses a garbage collector to 
reclaim the memory occupied by objects that are no longer in use.
• When there are no more references to an object, the object becomes 
eligible for destruction.
• Every object has a destructor that’s invoked by the garbage 
collector to perform termination housekeeping before its memory 
is reclaimed.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 44 ---
• A destructor’s name is the class name, preceded by a tilde, and it has 
no access modifier in its header.
• After an object’s destructor is called, the object becomes eligible for 
garbage collection—the memory for the object can be reclaimed by 
the garbage collector.
• Memory leaks are less likely in C# than languages like C and C++ 
(but some can still happen in subtle ways).
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 45 ---
• Other types of resource leaks can occur, for example if an app fails to 
close a file that it has opened.
• A problem with the garbage collector is that it is not guaranteed to 
perform its tasks at a specified time. For this reason, destructors are 
rarely used.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 46 ---
• A static variable or property is used when only one copy of a 
particular variable should be shared by all objects of a class.
• A static variable or property represents classwide information—
all objects of the class share the same piece of data.
• The declaration of a static variable or property begins with the 
keyword static.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 47 ---
• The scope of a static variable is the body of its class.
• A class’s public static members can be accessed by qualifying the 
member name with the class name and the member access (.) 
operator, as in Math.PI.
• A class’s private static class members can be accessed only 
through the class’s methods and properties. 
• To access a private static member from outside its class, a 
public static method or property can be provided.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 48 ---
A static method (or property) cannot access non-static class 
members directly, because a static method (or property) can be 
called even when no objects of the class exist. 
For the same reason, this cannot be used in a static method—the 
this reference always refers to a specific object of the class. 
When a static method is called, it does not know which object to 
manipulate and there might not be any objects of its class in memory.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 49 ---
Class Employee declares private static auto-implemented property 
Count to maintain a count of the number of Employee objects that 
have been created. 
Count’s set accessor is private, because only class Employee should 
be able to modify Count’s value. 
Count is a static auto-implemented property, so the compiler creates 
a corresponding private static variable that Count manages. 
When you declare a static variable and do not initialize it, the 
compiler initializes it to the type’s default value (in this case, 0).
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 50 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 51 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 52 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 53 ---
The principle of least privilege states that code should be granted the 
amount of privilege and access needed to accomplish its designated 
task, but no more.
Constants declared with const must be initialized to a constant value 
when they’re declared.
C# provides keyword readonly to specify that an instance variable of 
an object is not modifiable and that any attempt to modify it after the 
object is constructed is an error.
A readonly variable’s identifier uses Pascal Case by convention.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 54 ---
Although readonly instance variables can be initialized when they’re 
declared, this isn’t required. 
A readonly variable should be initialized by each of the class’s 
constructors or in the variable’s declaration. 
Each constructor can assign values to a readonly instance variable 
multiple times—the variable doesn’t become unmodifiable until after
the constructor completes execution. 
If a constructor does not initialize the readonly variable, the variable 
uses the same default value as any other instance variable.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 55 ---
const members must be assigned values at compile time. 
const members can be initialized only with other constant values, such 
as integers, string literals, characters and other const members. 
Constant members with values that cannot be determined at compile 
time—such as constants that are initialized with the result of a method 
call—must be declared with keyword readonly, so they can be 
initialized at execution time. 
Variables that are readonly can be initialized with more complex 
expressions, such as an array initializer or a method call that returns a 
value or a reference to an object. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 56 ---
C# Getter-Only Auto-Implemented Properties and readonly
When an auto-implemented property has only a get accessor, the 
property can be used only to read the value, so the compiler implicitly 
declares the corresponding private instance variable as readonly. 
Getter-only auto-implemented properties can be initialized in their 
declarations or in constructors. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 57 ---
• The Class View displays the fields, methods and 
properties for all classes in a project. 
• Select View > Class View to display the Class View
as a tab in the same position within the IDE
• The view follows a hierarchical structure, with the 
project name as the root. 
• When a class is selected, its members appear in the 
lower half of the window.
public methods are indicated by purple boxes
public properties are indicated by wrench icons
If a class has any private members, those 
members’ icons contain small padlocks.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 58 ---
• You can use the Object Browser to learn about 
the functionality provided by a specific class.
• To open the Object Browser, select View > 
Object Browser.
• The Object Browser lists all methods provided 
by class Math in the upper-right frame.
• If you click the name of a member in the upper-
right frame, a description of that member 
appears in the lower-right frame.
• The Object Browser can be a quick mechanism 
to learn about a class or one of its methods.
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 59 ---
You can create operators that work with objects of your own types—
via a process called operator overloading. 
You can overload most operators. 
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 60 ---
• The .NET Framework Class Library provides several classes, called 
collections, used to store groups of related objects.
• These classes provide efficient methods that organize, store and 
retrieve your data without requiring knowledge of how the data is 
being stored.
©1992-2014 by Pearson Education, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 61 ---
The generic collection class List<T> (from namespace 
System.Collections.Generic) does not need to
be reallocated to change its size.
List<T> is called a generic class because it can be used with any type 
of object.
T is a placeholder for the type of the objects stored in the list.
The next slides shows some common methods and properties of class 
List<T>.

--- Page 62 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 63 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 64 ---
Figure demonstrates dynamically resizing a List object.
The Count property returns the number of elements 
currently in the List.
The Capacity property indicates how many items the 
List can hold without having to grow. 
When the List is created, both are initially 0—though the 
Capacity is implementation dependent. 

--- Page 65 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 66 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 67 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 68 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 69 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 70 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 71 ---
© 2018 Pearson Education, Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

--- Page 72 ---
Collection initializers provide a convenient syntax (similar to array 
initializers) for initializing a collection. For example;
var items = new List<string> {"aQua", "RusT", "yElLow", "rEd"};
Explicitly creates the List<string> with new, so the compiler knows that the 
initializer list contains elements for a List<string>
The following declaration would generate a compilation error, 
because the compiler cannot determine whether you wish to create 
an array or a collection
var items = {"aQua", "RusT", "yElLow", "rEd"};
©1992-2014 by Pearson Education, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
